The Nigerian Tax
Reform Acts: Top 20
changes to know and
top 6 things to do
June 2025

www.pwc.com/ng

The Nigerian Tax Reform Acts

PwC

02

Overview
On 26 June 2025, President Bola Ahmed Tinubu signed the four (4) Tax Reform Bills
into law. These laws include the Nigeria Tax Act (NTA), The Nigeria Tax
Administration Act (NTAA), The Nigeria Revenue Service Act (NRSA) and the Joint
Revenue Board Act (JRBA), collectively referred to as “the Acts”. As of the time of this
publication, the effective date of the Acts has not yet been publicised. However, there
are indications that this date will not be earlier than 1 January 2026.
The Acts comprehensively overhaul the Nigerian tax system to drive economic
growth, increase revenue generation, improve the business environment and
enhance effective tax administration across the different levels of government.
Here are the top 20 changes to know about the Acts.

Top 20 changes to know

01

Increased exemption threshold for small companies - Small companies are

02

Increased Capital Gains Tax (CGT) rate – The NTA increases the Capital Gains

03

CGT on Indirect transfer of shares - The NTA introduces CGT on indirect

04

Introduction of Development Levy - Nigerian companies except small

05

Minimum Effective Tax Rate (ETR) - Nigerian companies who are members of a

now exempt from Companies Income Tax (CIT), Capital Gains Tax (CGT) and the
newly introduced Development levy (see below). Small companies are defined as
companies with annual gross turnovers of NGN100million (previously
NGN25million) and below and total fixed assets not exceeding NGN250million.

Tax rate from 10% to 30% for companies. This effectively aligns the CGT and
Companies Income Tax rate and reduces any tax arbitrage that could have been
unduly enjoyed in the classification between chargeable gains and trading income.
For individuals, capital gains will be taxed at the applicable income tax rate based on
the progressive tax band of the individual.

transfers of shares in Nigerian companies so that where shares are disposed of in
intermediary holding companies offshore, a Nigeria CGT is triggered (subject to
treaty exemptions). Also, the tax exemption threshold for the sale of shares in
Nigerian companies has been increased to NGN150million (from NGN 100 million)
in any 12 consecutive months, provided that the gains do not exceed NGN10million.

companies will pay a “Development Levy” at 4% of their assessable profits (i,e. tax
profits before deducting tax depreciation and losses). The Development Levy
consolidates the Tertiary Education Tax (TET), Information Technology Levy (IT),
the National Agency for Science and Engineering Infrastructure (NASENI) levy and
the Police Trust Fund (PTF) levy.

multinational group with aggregate group turnover of EUR750million and above or
have an annual turnover of NGN50billion and above, will now be subject to a
minimum effective tax rate (ETR) of 15% of their “Net Income”. Net Income is
defined as profits before tax excluding franked investment income and unrealised
gains or losses, except for life insurance companies where the definition of Net
Income also excludes gross and investment income for policyholders. The minimum
effective tax rule does not apply to Free Zone companies on their exports out of
Nigeria, provided that such companies are not part of multinational groups.

The Nigerian Tax Reform Acts

PwC

03

The Nigerian parent company of a multinational group will have to pay a top up tax
where its subsidiaries have paid taxes below the minimum 15% ETR.

06

Controlled Foreign Company rules - The NTA imposes a tax on undistributed

07

Taxable profits of non-residents – The NTA expands the scope of the activities

08

Minimum Tax for Non-resident companies - Non-resident companies who

09

Restriction on the tax exemption status of free zone entities – Based on

10

Introduction of Economic Development Incentive - The Acts replace the

11

A more progressive Personal Income Tax (PIT) regime - The NTA changes

12

Resident and Non-Resident Individuals defined - PIT will apply to the

profits of foreign companies controlled by Nigerian companies, where it is considered
that the foreign subsidiary could have distributed dividends without harming its
business.

of non-resident companies that are subject to tax in Nigeria. Notably, the NTA
introduces "force of attraction" rules. Under these rules, certain activities carried out
by a non-resident company or its related parties, can be taxed as part of the nonresident company’s permanent establishment (PE) in Nigeria, even if those activities
are not physically conducted through the PE. In addition, profits from Engineering,
Procurement, and Construction contracts can be taxed in Nigeria, even if some of the
activities are performed under separate contracts or outside Nigeria.

have a taxable presence in Nigeria will now be subject to minimum tax based on the
percentage of their earnings before interest and tax (EBIT) to the total income
generated from Nigeria. In any case, tax payable by such companies cannot be less
than the withholding tax (WHT) rate applicable to the income, or 4% of the income.

the publicly available version of the bills submitted for presidential assent, Free Zone
companies will continue to enjoy full tax exemption on their exports, or output that
go into goods or services eventually exported, or supplied to oil and gas companies.
Proportionate taxes apply where more than 25% of the Free Zone company’s sales are
made to the customs territory. From 1 January 2028, the full profits of Free Zone
entities will be subject to tax if they make any sales to the customs territory.

“pioneer” tax holiday incentive, with an “Economic Development Incentive” (or EDI).
This incentive introduces a tax credit of 5% per annum for 5 years on qualifying
capital expenditure purchased by eligible companies within 5 years effective from the
production date. If a company has unused tax credits or qualifying capital expenses, it
can carry them forward for another 5 years. Any credits still unused after this
timeline will expire.

the income brackets and applicable tax rates for each bracket. Individuals earning
NGN800,000 or less per annum will now be exempt from tax on their income and
gains, while higher income earners will be taxed at a higher rate up to 25%. The Act
also increases the tax exemption threshold for compensation for loss of employment
or injury from NGN10million to NGN50million

worldwide income of a resident individual which is now clearly defined in the new
Act. Prior to now there had been varied interpretations due to a lack of proper
definition of “residence”. With the definition extending to individuals with
substantial economic and immediate family ties in a year of assessment, the law
widens the tax net. Employment income will now be taxed in Nigeria only if the
individual is resident in Nigeria or performs duties in Nigeria without paying tax in
their country of residence.

The Nigerian Tax Reform Acts

PwC

04

13

Introduction of the Tax Ombuds office - The Acts introduce the Tax Ombuds

14

Input VAT Recovery - The VAT rate of 7.5% has been retained. Nigeria now

15

VAT at zero rate on essential goods and services - The NTA expands the list

16

VAT fiscalisation rules - Nigeria has now codified VAT fiscalisation rules and

17

Update to the VAT sharing formula The Acts reduce the Federal

18

Increased penalties for non-compliance - There has been a significant

19

Disclosure of tax planning arrangements - The NTAA requires companies to

office to liaise with the tax authorities on behalf of taxpayers, and serve as an
independent arbiter to review and resolve complaints relating to taxes, levies,
duties or similar regulatory charges.

adopts globally recognised VAT principles that allow for the claim of input VAT on
all purchases including services and fixed assets. Businesses can now recover input
VAT provided that the input VAT is directly related to their supplies that are also
subject to VAT

of zero-rated items to include essential goods and services such as basic food items,
medical and pharmaceutical products, educational books and materials, electricity
generation and transmission services, medical equipment and services, tuition fees,
exports (excluding oil and gas exports) etc. The impact of this is that businesses
selling these goods and services can recover their VAT costs, despite the zero rate
which was previously not possible by law.

mandatory e-invoicing for businesses operating in the country. This sets Nigeria
apart as an early adopter of e-invoicing in Africa. Companies in Nigeria are now
mandated to implement the fiscalisation system deployed by the tax authority for
the collection of VAT.

Government’s share of VAT from 15% to 10%, while increasing the allocations of
states and Local Government Areas to 55% and 35%, respectively. The VAT
revenue assigned to states and local governments is further allocated as follows:
50% divided equally, 20% based on population, and 30% based on place of
consumption.

increase in non-compliance penalties and the introduction of new penalties. Some
of the updates include increase in the penalty for failure to file returns to
NGN100,000 in the first month, and NGN50,000 for every month the failure
continues, introduction of new penalties such as penalty of NGN5million for
awarding contracts to individuals or entities that are not registered for tax,
penalties for failure to grant access for deployment of technology, inducing a tax
officer etc.

voluntarily and proactively notify the tax authorities of tax planning transactions or
schemes which can provide a tax advantage. The term "tax advantage" refers
broadly to any situation where a person or entity benefits from a favorable tax
outcome. This includes obtaining new or increased tax reliefs, receiving or
increasing tax repayments, reducing or avoiding tax charges or assessments,
deferring tax payments or accelerating tax repayments, and avoiding obligations to
deduct or account for tax. Essentially, it covers any arrangement or action that
results in a more beneficial tax position than would otherwise occur.

The Nigerian Tax Reform Acts

20

PwC

05

FIRS renamed the Nigeria Revenue Service and SIRS become
autonomous - The Federal Inland Revenue Service (FIRS) has now been renamed
the Nigeria Revenue Service (NRS) to reflect its responsibilities as the body to assess,
collect and account for revenue due to federation. The Acts also provide that State
Internal Revenue Services will be autonomous in the running of their affairs. The Law
also provides the framework for joint audits and for NRS to, upon request, support
State and Local governments to collect and administer taxes.

Top 6 things to do
In view of the changes introduced by the Acts, companies and businesses need to:

01

Become aware
Sensitise management –
Organise sensitisation
workshops for relevant
board committees and
executive management on
the impact of the reforms
on your business

02

Empower your peopleTrain and upskill staff to
ensure seamless adoption of
new tax laws in specific
roles and processes that are
impacted.

03

Assess
Carry out a holistic impact
analysis - Proactively assess
the corporate structure,
operational, financial and
compliance implications
arising from the tax laws.
This can also include
considering the impact on
supply chains, commercial
arrangements such as
acquisitions and
divestments, incentive
regimes and so on.

Articulate
Reframe tax strategy- Reframe your tax strategy to align with the
commercial goals of the business. More will be expected from the tax
function to protect business value amidst the various changes arising
from the new laws or technology changes such as the VAT fiscalisation.
Set up a Tax Risk Register- Implement a living risk register to
continuously identify, monitor, and control tax risks and opportunities
that have been triggered by the reforms in real time.

04

Operationalise and implement
Update compliance processes- Taxpayers will need to update their
compliance processes in line with the tax laws. For example, taxpayers
will need to update their systems to cater for new rates, revised
compliance obligations and filing requirements, information sharing,
claim of input VAT etc.
Execute your implementation plan- Achieve tasks in your
implementation plan effectively and efficiently in line with your
strategic objectives.
Leverage technology- Update the logic in accounting software and
ERP to align with the new rules. Ensure processes and technology align
to ensure end-to-end compliance and prepare for changes such as einvoicing.
Optimise tax governance & management frameworks- Evaluate,
expand, or eliminate tax functions and processes for effectiveness and
efficiency, closing compliance gaps and embedding robust internal
controls.

The Nigerian Tax Reform Acts

05

Engage
Engage stakeholders Determine a
communication strategy
and protocol for key
internal and external
stakeholders. Some
examples include:
Shareholders – ROI impact,
Employees – PAYE impact,
Customers – e-invoicing
processes, Vendors – KYC
and validation, Tax
authorities – rulings on new
risks, host communities etc
to ensure a smooth
transition and adoption
process.

PwC

06

06

Monitor
Stay updated- Regularly
monitor official
communications,
information circulars or
regulations from the
government authorities
issued pursuant to the Tax
laws.
Manage change - Apart
from training and
upskilling, there should be a
deliberate change
management plan to drive
behaviour, review and
monitor the transition and
adoption of the new rules.

Conclusion
The recent enactment of the Acts marks a significant transformation in Nigeria’s tax
landscape. It is crucial for businesses to carry out a comprehensive review of their tax
strategies, processes, and compliance frameworks to ensure readiness and resilience.
PwC has developed a robust sector-by-sector analysis of these changes, which will
provide more insights and guidance to help businesses understand and respond to the
evolving tax environment.

Contacts

Chijioke Uwaegbute

Kenneth Erikume

Esiri Agbeyi

Partner and Tax & Regulatory
Services Leader
chijioke.uwaegbute@pwc.com

Partner
Tax
kenneth.y.erikume@pwc.com

Partner
Tax
emuesiri.agbeyi@pwc.com

Seun Adu

Tiwalade Otufale

Tim Siloma

Partner
Tax
seun.y.adu@pwc.com

Partner
Tax
tiwalade.otufale@pwc.com

Partner
Tax
timothy.s.siloma@pwc.com

At PwC, we help clients build trust and reinvent so they can turn complexity into competitive advantage. We’re a
tech-forward, people-empowered network with more than 370,000 people in 149 countries. Across audit and
assurance, tax and legal, deals and consulting we help clients build, accelerate and sustain momentum. Find out
more at www.pwc.com.

